Observability concept page update (#1214)
dapr/docs: daprdocs/content/en/concepts/observability-concept.md

linkTitle: "Observability"
weight: 500
description: >
  Monitor applications through tracing, metrics, logs and health
---

> When building an applications, understanding how the system is behaving is an important part of operating it - this includes having the ability to observe the internal flows of an application, gauging its performance and becoming aware of problems as soon as they occur. This is challenging for any system but even more so for a distributed system comprised of multiple microservices where a flow may start in one microservices but continue in another. Observability is critical in production environments but also useful during development to understand bottlenecks, improve performance and perform basic debugging across the span of microservices.

Reviewer: you use the word "flow" here in this paragraph. "Calls" is usually a more common and typical term.

Author: changes where it made sense and clarified where it is meant to mean a series of calls

> While some data points about an application can be gathered from the underlying infrastructure (e.g. memory consumption, CPU usage), other meaningful information must be collected from an "application aware" layer - one that can show how important flows are executed across microservices. This usually means a developer must add some code to instrument an application for this purpose. Often, instrumentation code is simply meant to send collected data such as traces and metrics to an external monitoring tool or service that can help store, visualize and analyze all this information. Having to maintain this code, which is not part of the core logic of the application, is another burden on the developer - sometimes requiring understanding monitoring tools APIs, using additional SDKs etc. This instrumentation may also add to the portability challenges of an application which may require different instrumentation depending on where the application is deployed (e.g. different cloud providers offer different monitoring solutions and an on-prem deployment might require an on-prem solution).

Reviewer: you use the word "flow" here in this paragraph. "Calls" is usually a more common and typical term.

Author: changes where it made sense and clarified where it is meant to mean a series of calls

## Observability for your application with Dapr
When building an application which is leveraging Dapr building blocks to perform service-to-service calls and pub/sub messaging, Dapr offers an advantage in respect to [distributed tracing]({{<ref tracing>}}) - Because this inter-service communication flows through the Dapr sidecar, the sidecar is in a unique position to offload the burden of application level instrumentation. 

### Distributed tracing
Dapr can be [configured to emit tracing data]({{<ref setup-tracing.md>}}), and because Dapr does so using standard protocols such as the [Zipkin](https://zipkin.io) protocol, it can be easily integrated with multiple [monitoring backends]({{<ref supported-tracing-backends>}}). 

<img src="/images/observability-tracing.png" width=1000>

### OpenTelemetry collector

> Dapr can also be configured to work with an [OpenTelemtry collector]({{<ref open-telemetry-collector>}}) which offers even more compatibility with external monitoring tools.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dapr can also be configured to work with the [OpenTelemetry Collector]({{<ref open-telemetry-collector>}}) which offers even more compatibility with external monitoring tools.
```

<img src="/images/observability-opentelemetry-collector.png" width=1000>

### Tracing context
Dapr uses [W3C tracing]({{<ref w3c-tracing>}}) specification for tracing context and can generate and propagate the context header itself or propagate user provided context headers.

## Observability for the Dapr sidecar and system services
Like for other parts of your system, you will want to be able to observe Dapr itself and collect metrics and logs emitted by the Dapr sidecar that runs along each microservice as well as the Dapr related services in your environment such as the control plane services that are deployed for a Dapr enabled Kubernetes cluster.

<img src="/images/observability-sidecar.png" width=1000>

### Logging

> Dapr generates [logs]({{<ref "logs.md">}}) to provide visibility to sidecar operation and to help users identify issues and perform debugging. Logs events contain warning, error, info, and debug messages produced by Dapr system services. Dapr can also be configured to send logs to collectors such as [Fluentd]({{< ref fluentd.md >}}) and [Azure Monitor]({{< ref azure-monitor.md >}}) so they can be easily searched, analyzed and provide insights.

Reviewer: "visibility into sidecar operations"

Author: fixed

### Metrics

> Metrics are the series of measured values and counts that are collected and stored over time. [Dapr metrics]({{<ref "metrics">}}) provide monitoring capabilities to understand the behavior of Dapr system services. For example, the service metrics between Dapr sidecars and user apps show call latency, traffic failures, error rates of requests etc. Dapr system services metrics show side car injection failures, health of the system services including CPU usage, number of actor placement made etc.

Reviewer: this sentence "behavior of Dapr system services" seems to imply that metrics only apply to Dapr system services. The following sentence then says metrics between Dapr and your application. I would make it clearer here what metrics refers to in the 2nd sentence. 

I would also reword this sentence "For example, the service metrics between Dapr sidecar" to "For example, the metrics between a Dapr sidecar and the user application show...". The word "service metrics" here really throws you off. 

It would be good to have a link or even a picture of showing what you mean by the system service metrics.

Author: Clarified and added link
